Here for 30 minutes.
I'll hand that time to you now. Thank you.
And, uh, we'll let the morning, we'll let you talk
for a bit, and then I'm sure members will have some
Questions from that.
Uh, thank you very much, uh, Mr. Chair for, for welcome.
Uh, this is my first appearance in front
of the Select committee, thin this Rob.
Uh, and so it's good to be here
and good to have an opportunity to talk
with you about three reports that have been produced
by our office in recent times.
Uh, there are reports that many
of you will have already had engagement with, uh,
but they are reports that are worth engaging with
because they speak to some challenges with our
OIA, uh, legislation, uh, in key agencies
of our system, and particularly, uh, in relation
to Health New Zealand.
Uh, and in relation to phar, uh,
and to a report that we have prepared, which deals
with the challenges facing
aged care facilities, particularly secure
aged care facilities for either dementia
or psychogeriatric patients
or residents, as we've called them, uh, in the,
uh, in the reports.
And these are obviously issues that are of significant
interest and importance, uh, to many, uh, in the system.
So if I just talk very briefly about each of those reports,
and then we're very happy to answer questions.
Uh, the Aged Care, uh, report, uh,
is a report that's prepared
by the Ombudsman in the context of our opposition
as a national prevention mechanism under the Crimes
of Torture Act.
And that legislation, as you're probably aware, allows us
to look at areas where people are detained
or denied their normal liberties, uh,
and to look at the conditions in which they're kept
and the circumstances under which they're kept.
And as you will have read in the report, uh,
which was produced by the previous Ombudsman, Peter Bocher,
uh, the key finding there,
or one of the key findings there was that in many instances,
the legal requirements to enable somebody
to be placed into a secure facility, to be deprived
of the liberty not to be able
to leave a facility when they choose to do so, uh,
was not well recorded, was not well understood,
and in some cases was not present largely at all.
Now, the general basis
for people when they're moved into those facilities, uh,
is under an enduring power of attorney, which is a mechanism
that many of you will be, uh, familiar with.
But it was not uncommon
as our inspectors found when they visited 148
of these facilities around our country.
Wow. Uh, to find that those records were not being kept.
It was not uncommon to find that the enduring power
of attorney had not been activated appropriately.
And you'll be aware that before
and enduring the power of attorney becomes famili,
uh, becomes active.
Uh, a medical professional has to determine
that there's been a loss of cognitive function.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and so again, there was an area of, um,
of challenge there.
And in many instances, the staff,
although the staff were absolutely as, uh, Mr.
Boche found trying to do their very, very best
for the residents, uh,
in those facilities were not well trained.
Uh, and we're not, uh, and we're under significant pressure
because of staff, uh, funding constraints.
So that report, I think,
has identified some critical areas for further work.
Uh, and we are continuing to engage
and follow up, uh, with, in, in that space.
Uh, we are talking with Health New Zealand about the way in
which we might organize a central repository
for the documentation relating to people, uh,
in these facilities.
Yes. Um, so that's a, uh, that's a, uh,
the key elements of that report.
Uh, the other two reports, the Pharma
and Health New Zealand reports were investigations into
timeliness in relation to the OIA, uh, both of them.
Uh, we, we did that with seven agencies.
Uh, these two were the ones that, uh, you wanted to
Look at. Sorry, Mr. Ellen,
I'll just jump in there, but there Sure.
Um, there was, uh, a q
and A program that, um, sure.
Both Mr. Baier did with, with Jack Tamer on Yeah.
On the OIA process. And it was incredibly damning.
If folks have not had the opportunity
to view it, I think you should.
It's very good. And I,
and I know that, I mean, I know locally in,
we have certainly had struggles with our local council, um,
through the OIO process,
so I hear you loud and clear on this one. Yeah.
And, and, and that was why, um, Mr.
Boho initiated that investigation, uh,
and he invest the investigation under the Ombudsman Act.
And, and, and, uh, the reason was
because he had heard from many sources, probably from,
from some parliamentarians, certainly from media sources,
uh, that the OIA was not being, uh,
respected in terms of timeliness.
Uh, and what he has found in the case of both
of these two organizations, uh, is that
that was absolutely the case.
Uh, there were of course reasons, uh, why
that was the case in, in, in each circumstance.
Uh, those were different.
In the case of, uh, health New Zealand, which was the, at,
at the time of this investigation,
had the second largest number of requests, uh,
that were being posed to it, of all agencies.
Uh, the issue of course, was
that it had just been established.
It was, uh, it's an amalgamation as you well know of, uh,
uh, of previously distributed, uh, areas.
And there was challenge Yes.
Uh, in, I'll just finish the sentence.
And there was challenge in, in bringing together
the technology
and particularly access to information when
multiple areas were being requested.
That's not an excuse, but that was the explanation
that was given for those challenges. Sorry.
Thank you, Mr. Allen. Dr. Vera.
Thanks, Ms. Allen for joining the committee today.
We're lucky to have someone
with his distinguished career in public service and,
and the role that you are in.
Um, I want to turn to the report on Health New Zealand.
Page six. Um, we, um,
ministerial interactions are, are discussed.
Yes. Uh, clearly this is a very important part of the OIA
and I see your, um, final paragraph
as it goes over the page.
I encourage Health New Zealand to seek opportunities
where it's no surprises, obligations to the minister
can be fulfilled without the need to provide OIA responses.
Can, can you please describe for the committee how,
how it is that they can fulfill their requirements under the
OIA and the no surprises policy?
Could Health New Zealand choose to reply
to respondents, uh, sorry to people re requesters, uh,
without providing the full, um, document
to the minister's office, uh,
and for the minister to provide feedback on
what could be redacted?
Thank you. Uh, as Mr.
Bocher, uh, has recognized the no surprises policy is an
important component, uh,
of government activity here in, in this country.
Uh, and it is important that, uh, ministries
of agencies feel able to
ensure the minister is appropriately appraised, uh, of, uh,
OIA requests.
The point he is making is
that the decision making still rests with the CE
of the individual agency,
and it cannot be abdicated to a minister.
And his concern, I think in this context,
although I'm speaking for him,
and he could speak probably more eloquently for himself, uh,
was that his sense was,
and that our investigator's view was, uh,
that in some instances what was happening here was
that the matter was being referred not for your information,
but rather for your decision.
Uh, and that the decision was then being taken at a
ministerial level rather than CE level,
which is the level according to the
official information legislation at which it should be
Taken. So if I
may, Mr. Chair, just, uh, that's deeply troubling.
This is information that should be in the public domain,
and the idea that ministers get to choose what is, uh,
convenient to them for them to be released or,
or not, is not how the system is meant to work.
Correct. Uh, I understand an investigation
has been done here.
How will the public mps know
that this problem has been fixed?
Well, what, what we do know is
that Health New Zealand has changed its practice, uh,
in relation to the way in which it engages on
that particular issue.
Uh, it is now providing information for,
it is now providing advice for the minister's information.
The decisions are being taken, uh, within the organization,
uh, at an appropriate delegated level.
And, and that change is a consequence of this report.
And that change is a consequence, exactly as you say,
of a recognition of the practice previously, to some extent.
It won't have been in every instance, I'm sure, but
nonetheless, to some extent, was inconsistent
with what is expected.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, I, I thank you. I've said enough.
We've sort of moved into questions.
I'm perfectly happy to answer questions if you have.
Well, I can pick up on the, um, aged care
I mentioned as well.
Um, in the investigation, were there instances of people
who should not have been, um, in
dementia care, being in dementia care?
Um, I'll ask, uh, I, I have with
Me without appropriate legal protections.
So I understand the point that these legal protections on
who can be, um, uh, held in secure care exist for a reason,
and they should be observed.
Uh, but did it result in the wrong person ending up in,
in Kia in any instance?
Because I wasn't engaged in those reports,
I've brought two people who were, uh, with me
and Erin, uh, who leads our OPCA team, uh,
will probably be able to answer
that question more overly than I can.
Uh, so generally what we saw when there was, um,
IEG irregularities with the paperwork,
it was more a situation of, um, EPO
that perhaps hadn't been activated, that, uh,
facilities then went on to, um, ensure that
that had occurred or paperwork that, um, whanau hadn't
provided, and they followed up and, and, um, and,
and then, uh, we are able to confirm that they had that.
Um, I don't believe that we had any particular instances
where, uh, subsequent to, um,
that being, uh, brought to the attention of the facility
that, um, that the legal authority wasn't then, um,
activated or ensured that there was appropriately recorded.
One sec. Starting to be clear, many people go into care
from hospital, and we have this tremendous problem in
hospital of people who need care, uh, staying
for long periods of time in hospital,
and those beds aren't available for people
with acute illness in hospital.
Is it the case that all of that paperwork needs
to be concluded
before the person can be moved from the hospital to care,
Uh, For, in terms of the activation of the EPOA
and the decision made about, um, being placed in dementia
or psychogeriatric care?
No. There are instances where that can occur
once they've been moved so long as, so long as that
that does occur, one of the, the difficulties is, um,
who is responsible for ensuring that?
And so those conversations are still ongoing
with Health New Zealand as to whether
that's their responsibility for ensuring that that occurs
or that, or at the facility level.
Okay. So this is about process
and implementation of the law, not that the law is a barrier
to getting people out of hospital.
Correct. Yeah. Thank you.
Um, and it is probably just following up, up on that,
but I appreciate you are looking solely at people in
dementia care, so you're not really looking at
populations just before that.
So I appreciate this is,
but like asking how long is a piece of string,
do you have any, any view on the number of people
that may be in aged care that
because the processes need
to be followed are actually not within secure units
that probably should be in secure units?
Uh, I, I, I don't think I could give you any sort
of a figure in relation to that.
As you say, that's not something that
we specifically look at.
Um, I think that there are other challenges in terms of,
of people entering secure care, um, more around, uh,
capacity, um, you know, uh, to accommodate people as opposed
to, um, legal authority lacking.
Um, but, uh, there, there could well be, um,
a proportion of people who, um, they need to, uh,
ensure that the paperwork, uh,
and that that EPOA, for example, is activated prior to, to,
um, to finding a place.
But as I say, I think there are other,
other more significant factors that are, um, that are
around, uh, bed capacity as opposed to, um,
legal authority that, that are, um,
that would limit the ability to move into secure care.
So, so, so the process itself is not a barrier?
Uh, no.
But ensuring that there are sufficient protection there
and making sure that, um, uh, that there is
accountability for, uh, legal authority being obtained,
whether that's, um, through Health New Zealand
or in a centralized way
or at the facility level, is an area that,
that we've definitely noted as of concern.
Uh, 'cause there seems to be, uh, inconsistency and,
and a lack of clarity about, um, who's responsible
and accountable for, for that.
Thanks. Thank you. So what's the lack
of timeliness on OAA responses?
What can you do to improve that?
Like how can you hold agencies accountable,
councils accountable to make sure that they
are fulfilling their obligations, uh, to meet OAA requests?
Well, I think there, there's a few things
that we talk about routinely with them.
The first is resourcing their OIA, um,
teams appropriately.
And you'll have seen report they had a single person, uh,
doing that, and it simply wasn't enough resource.
So recognizing that, uh, that an appropriate level
of resources are required.
Uh, the second is educating their, uh,
teams about the OIA,
because if you, again, just stay with the pharma example
for a moment, you will have seen that the key
or one of the key constraints that they had, uh,
was their view that all of the commercially, all
of the commercial information they had was hugely sensitive
and could not possibly be released.
Now, of course, the legislation doesn't work that way.
Uh, the re re legislation works first in favor
of release as it's under underpinning, um, premise,
but then balances that, uh, with the commercial factors
and other factors that might ultimately lead it
to not being released.
And so making sure that people understand that
and that there is, as Mr.
Bocher called it, a sort of culture of OIA understanding
and compliance is really important.
Uh, and we are doing a lot of work, uh,
in that space as well.
I think that, just one last thing. Sure.
I think that the PSC has helped a great deal, uh,
by recording and publishing timeliness statistics for
agencies, and it's amazing how much, uh,
something like that Yes.
Uh, led by the PSC, uh, can change behaviors.
So, so there's a bit of, there's a bit of sort of carrot
and a little bit of stick. Yeah.
Uh, and, and talking to that resourcing case, would it be
uncommon or common for an agency to say, um,
that the request will take a long time for us to fulfill and
therefore there will be a charge associated with it?
It's relatively uncommon for those, for those, um, uh,
for charges to be made.
They are made in some particularly complex cases
and also smaller, um, agencies.
Um, some of the smaller local government, uh,
agencies does school trust boards
and things like that, which are not the reviews
Here, not a city council.
Uh, city councils would sometimes,
but they tend to be the smallest city
councils rather than the larger.
Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Yeah. Sorry Ji. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, and thank you for that.
I was just going to carry on from, uh, that question
and ask what your view is on whether there's a need
for legislative reform in terms of the OAA.
There was a report done, uh,
by the Helen Clark Foundation earlier this year
that made a number of recommendations in this space,
including on points such as a penalties regime on
limiting the scope for transferring requests to ministers
on amending the ACT so that ministerial officers can't, uh,
be consulted on departmental releases,
which you've mentioned, um, and,
and some other proposals as well.
And I'm just wondering what the benefit
of making those amendments as statutory amendments could be?
Well, uh, with eight weeks of knowledge, uh, of ombudsman,
uh, I'm, I'm not keen to opine two forcefully
or formally on whether
and to what extent legislative changes required.
I've seen the report that you are referring to.
I've also seen Mr.
Boucher's comments, uh, that he made on exiting this role,
which suggested that in his view, uh, the OIA was still fit
for purpose, uh, not withstanding some of these, uh, some
of these criticisms,
although he did, uh, make reference to the possibility
of penalty, uh, as being a mechanism, uh,
that need might need to be thought about in the future.
So I think there are, there are, there is a debate here.
What I, what I think you can say, uh, is that the,
the structure of the OIA, which balances public interest
and other interests to try
and get to a reasonable conclusion, uh, with a bias in favor
of disclosure, uh, seems to have worked pretty successfully,
uh, leave the timeliness point aside,
which I think, uh, the chair's made.
And I think that's has been a, an, an issue.
But actually when I've been around talking
to senior leaders in the government sector
and the local government sector
and other sectors that we engage with, uh,
and there isn't, um, a, a, an outpouring of concern
that's being communicated to me that
that balance can't work appropriately
in the current environment.
So I would be saying to you
that I don't think it's full sail change on the basis of
what I've read and heard,
but obviously we will continue
to be thinking about what's appropriate, society shifting,
the country shifting, the world shifting, uh,
and, uh, technology shifting, obviously.
And in that context, you do need
to be thinking constantly about whether your
legislation is fit for purpose.
I don't want to, I don't wanna, um, could I follow,
so you, you mentioned penalties.
Was there any, I mean, I know you said there was an early,
it's very early to be talking about that,
but was there any thought given to that, uh,
how would you even penalize agencies chief executives?
No, I haven't given any thought to that at all.
Uh, I was just recording that
that observation had been made.
Understood. Okay.
Um, I had a separate question about the convention against
torture work that's happened,
and the point about the legal paperwork not necessarily
being in place in a timely way.
Um, of course, the law being complied with in terms
of adequate paperwork is one part
of ensuring their rights protective framework.
Another part is ensuring that the law can be tested.
And I wondered if you had any observations
or comments on, um, access to justice for those individuals
who may wish to challenge, uh, either the existence
of paperwork or the justifications behind them,
and whether those conversations took place
as part of the review as well.
I might ask Erin to talk into the, the specifics of that,
but obviously, one of the foundational attributes
of the Ombudsman jurisdiction is to provide people
with access to a, a, an element
of the justice process where they feel
as though the system hasn't enabled them
to have that access.
The fact it's free, the fact it's confidential, uh,
I think assists with that.
And because it's inquisitorial rather adversarial, uh,
there's also significant strength, uh,
in the office being able to support the activity that, uh,
you've described in terms of the general premise,
in relation specifically to HGI, I'll get Erin
to talk in a second, but I just wanna make one comment taken
from, uh, the report, uh, was Mr.
Boucher's concern that
where people were in those facilities,
there weren't obvious people
who were there advocating for them.
Uh, and it was often falling to au to do that.
Uh, and that that wasn't always either easy or appropriate.
So I think the, the point you are making about
how does somebody who's in that situation act, um,
you know, advocate for themselves, uh,
is a legitimate question.
Uh, obviously if they're in, they're under an enduring power
of attorney, they'll have some sort of, uh, attorney
who potentially can do that.
Do you wanna make any comment, Karen?
Sorry, just to, just to clarify, your,
your question was about how you might challenge an EPOA,
for example, after it was activated.
Is that, oh, sorry,
That Point. No,
no. I think, I think, um, you, it was, uh,
absolutely on point, but, um, just more particularly, I,
I think that is an area, um,
because, uh, you know, it's sort of the flip side of,
you know, in one sense we're, we're seeing examples where
that hasn't been activated or, um, there,
there aren't records of that.
Um, on the flip side of it is, you know,
what are the consequences of an EPOA being activated?
And, um, people could end up being in secure care for
a very long period of time.
Um, and, uh, I think there are, uh, some, uh,
areas to further explore around how someone might be able
to, to challenge that or have the, the ability to do that.
Um, uh, as, um, the Chief Ombudsman has said, we noted
that, um, there is quite a reliance on, uh, whanau advocacy.
Um, and obviously if, if an EPOA is activated by a,
a family member, then, then there is a bit of a, a,
a conflict there too.
So, um, I think that is an area to explore further is
what protections there actually are.
Um, and also whether in activating the EPOA
or signing it originally, um, people are fully aware of some
of the, the outcomes from that, including, um,
being insecure care for, for such a prolonged period
of time, but also, um, consenting to, to treatments
and various other things, um, uh, that are, uh, are often,
um, uh, u the EPO is used as a basis for, um,
for being able to, um, start treatments
and various other things that people
may not be completely aware of.
So, yeah.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, could I ask you to expand on, um, one
of the elements in your report about the interaction
between no surprises, obligations to the minister,
and also, um, timeless obligations under the OIA
and how, what you've found in that regard
and does that over other, uh, departments and ministries?
Uh, yes. I'll get ansley to, to, to talk into it in,
in in more specifics,
but, uh, as you will have read in the report, uh,
there were concerns expressed, not just on the matters
that I've already spoken to, uh,
but also that in some instances
things were being transferred to ministers in circumstances
that were not necessarily appropriate.
And so understanding the foundations for those transfers
and how they were being made, uh, is an important component,
uh, of, uh, uh, the compliance,
uh, with the, uh, legislative framework.
But I'll get, talk into specifics.
So, uh, with the departmental OIA request,
as John mentioned, the decision lies with the department.
Um, but information may be, um, in the,
within the minister's office.
So there are two ways that, um, that engagement occurs,
either consultation or for your information.
So there's specific legislation that deals
with consultation, which is one thing,
but we are more concerned about the f the FYI.
So if it's for your information to, um,
satisfy the obligation of the no surprises, um,
the reports are pretty clear that
that could happen at the same time or shortly
before the actual response goes out.
So you making sure that it's timely, um,
and that that ability, the, uh,
agencies can send the whole OAA request.
We also suggest that summaries could be submitted, uh, to
minister's offices about that request.
'cause the decision lies with the department
and it should go out as soon as reasonably practical
and shouldn't necessarily be held up if it's for,
for just for your information.
Alright. Does that answer your question? Did
Quite close. Do you have another,
oh, I'll just get a que Yeah.
It does answer the question, but I was gonna ask
about No, no, I'll go to her.
It's a new question. Sure. We have to wrap it up. Yeah.
I just wanted to ask a question around, um,
your confidence following your report,
and there's really pointed recommendations in terms
of action and, um, improvements that you believe
that the department, you know, when we come back
and we check on this again,
that they will structurally be ready
and have the relevant leadership in place to, um,
be more effective in the OIA.
Uh, so in relation to far,
I think there's good progress, uh, being made.
Obviously in terms of leadership,
they're currently under enacting, um, uh, ce, uh, so
that's still a transition for them.
Uh, in terms of Health New Zealand, again, I've met with,
uh, Dale, and I think the, uh,
there's certainly at a leadership level and,
and expressed intention, uh,
the challenge is quite significant in terms
of bringing those things together.
Uh, that's not, as I say, an excuse,
but it is a contextual, um, observation.
We are constantly in touch with them, uh,
and we will continue to be, uh, actively working
with them on the recommendations and their expectation.
And we'll be reporting back to committees, uh,
appropriately on that as we go forward.
Thank you. Very nice to have you in here
and, uh, congratulations on your new role.
Thank you, sir. Thank you. You now Good to have there.
Thank you everyone for coming in today.
We'll move out of public please.